With our code improvements out of the way, let's dive back into some internals of Flutter,
though this time internals you can actively take advantage of or which you will need from time to time
and that's the lifecycle of a widget.
Now what's that?
Now we'll actually have a different lifecycle for the different types of widgets we have. For a stateless widget,
the lifecycle essentially is that it's created
and of course as you learned, widgets are recreated multiple times when the build method of their parent
widget is called and that means the constructor is executed and then the build method is executed,
that's what you already learned. For stateful widgets,
we also have the constructor function being called but then there, we also have create state being
called to create that state object
and that's now where the interesting part begins.
Inside of that state object, you can add an initState method which will be called automatically,
so that's a reserved method name for a method that is executed automatically by Flutter when the state
object is created for the first time
and remember that the state object is managed independently of the widget,
so when the widget is rebuilt, initState will not run again,
it only runs when the state is created for the first time.
Thereafter, we have the build method which executes. Now you can always call set state to update the widget
and rebuild it
and in that case or when the widget is rebuilt because its parent widget build method was called, in
which case all child widgets are rebuilt as you learned, then didUpdateWidget executes.
So that's another method you can add in your state
actually, in the state object which is triggered whenever the widget that belongs to that state was updated
and then thereafter again, build runs.
Now if a widget is destroyed, so if it's removed because you rendered it conditionally and the condition now
is false, then dispose is called.
So all these special methods, initState, didUpdateWidget, dispose are all methods you can add
to your state object and they run when the state is created, when the attached widget changed or when
the state object is cleared, is removed, which happens when the widget is removed.
So not when the widget is rebuilt,
so when it's deleted and a new one is added, in that case the state would stick around
but if the widget is removed and is not rebuilt because again, it might have been rendered conditionally
and the condition now returns false.
Let's have a look at this in practice. Back in our code,
let's pick a nice widget where we can add these lifecycles and the new transaction widget isn't too
bad for that because it's a widget which also gets removed when we close this modal here, then when we close
this, this widget will be removed and therefore, this is a good candidate for implementing these different
lifecycle methods.
So as you learned, you implement them in NewTransactionState and to get a full overview of what's
happening,
let's actually start with the constructor of the widgets, not have the state but of the widget.
So there, we can now print constructor NewTransaction widget.
Now let's also print when create state is called and for that, I'll convert from a single expression
function here into a function with curly braces, where we can have more than one expression because of
course, I want to create my NewTransactionState and return it here
but before we do that, I also want to print create
state in NewTransaction widget and I also have to remove the semicolon after the constructor.
So now we have print statements in the widget,
let's now go to the state.
There, we can add a constructor,
we don't need it here but we can add it of course.
So let's add the constructor by repeating the name of the class, which is
_NewTransactionState
and here we can print constructor NewTransaction State.
Now you learned that there is an initState method which you can add
and here my IDE helps me, when I type init, I can hit enter and it adds initState. Override is added
because initState is implemented by the state class we're inheriting from, we're extending and if we
add it on our own, we add override to make it clear that this is not a mistake but that we deliberately
want to add our own, which means that the one in the parent class state which we're extending is not
called anymore but our own one is called and hence here, you also have to do something which you haven't
seen before,
we're calling super.initState. Super is a keyword in Dart which refers to the parent class. So we
inherit state here and that means that when the NewTransactionState is created, a state object is created
as well
and super here refers to that parent object, to that state object basically and makes sure that we also
call initState there, so that not just our own initState function runs but also the one that
was built into the state. Now before that is called however, you can do your own initialization and often,
that is for example used to make a HTTP request and load some data from a server or load some data
from a database,
anything like that.
It's also something we'll do later in the course once we reach the HTTP module. For now, all
I will do here is I will print initState, just like this, so that we can see that this really executes.
Now it's also worth pointing out that the official docs now state that you should call
super.initState first and therefore put your code after super.initState, not before it.
Now it won't make a difference because what happens in super.initState,
so initState of the parent class is very trivial and only matters for debugging, has no impact when
your app runs in production and you find more details about that in the next lecture.
In this course, I mostly call my code before super.initState and that's also what you find in
a lot of official examples
which is why I followed this practice but be aware that the official recommendation now is that you
call super.initState first and that's also the case for other lifecycle hooks I'll show later. When you
called super.something, call that first and have your code
after that. However, it actually won't make a difference, there is no code running in these super methods
that would not work or run differently
if you run your code first, that's really important.
Now I also mentioned that there is another method, didUpdateWidget. We can add this as well.
Now again, this is a method which also exists in the parent class,
we override it deliberately and just as with initState, we have to call the method in the parent class.
Important, you get an argument here and that is the previous widget that was attached to this state.
As I mentioned, this gets called when the widget that is attached to the state changes and then Flutter actually
gives you the old widget
so that you for example could compare it to the new widget because remember, you have that special widget
property which you can use in your state,
it always gives you access to your related widget, to your attached widget that belongs to that state.
Widget will now automatically refer to the updated widget,
so let's say the widget updated because it received a new argument in case it took any,
then here you could get access to the new widget and if you wanted to compare it to the old one,
Flutter gives you the old one as a convenience feature here as an argument.
In my case here, I only want to print didUpdateWidget though, to see when this runs. Now last but not
least, the state also can get removed at some point of time and for that, we can add dispose here.
Again we override a built-in method,
we have to call it on the parent class and then here, we can print dispose. With that,
let's refresh the entire app here and let's see what we get. Clear
the debug log so that we can clearly see everything
and now let's open that bottom sheet.
It comes up and if we now go back, we see what happens is that the constructor of the new transaction
widget is called, which makes sense because the new transaction widget is part of this modal sheet and
therefore this is created. Then create state is called,
that also make sense because that is what Flutter does for stateful widgets when it creates
the widgets. In that state, the constructor is therefore called, makes sense because we're creating our
own instance of our state class here and we're calling the constructor here ourselves,
hence of course we see the log here and then thereafter, you see initState is called, that's done
by Flutter
and now what you also see here, the constructor of new transaction was called again.
Now that does not happen because we're using a stateful widget here or anything like that, that simply
is it behavior Flutter has here
for this modal bottom sheet.
It does call
this builder function here in showModalBottomSheet, this function which returns a new transaction,
it simply call this builder function more than once.
Now the good thing about this, indeed a bit of weird behavior, is that it shows us that the constructor
of new transactions is called again because if this builder function here runs again, all these widgets
get created again,
so new transaction gets created again
but what we see now also is that create state is not called again and therefore, the constructor of the
state and initState is not called again
because, what I mentioned, the state is managed as a separate object and when the widget rebuilds, the
state is not recreated automatically,
instead it sticks around and simply the reference of the element, which manages the state, is updated
to point at the new widget. What is called however is didUpdateWidget,
this is called because our widget updated, the connected widget,
the new transaction widget was replaced with a new one because of the duplicate call in showModalBottomSheet
and therefore we get didUpdateWidget executed because the widget attached to the state was replaced
and that's why this is a convenient example because of this strange showModalBottomSheet behavior,
we actually see both initState and didUpdateWidget.
Now when I close this by clicking somewhere on the backdrop, you now see showModalBottomSheet really
goes into a frenzy and recreates this widget a couple of times, probably because of the animation it's
playing, this slide down animation which also uses a stateful widget behind the scenes, one built into
Flutter to update this. It recreates the new transaction widget a couple of times, as you see this triggers
didUpdateWidget but then in the end, you see dispose is called because in the end, once the animation
finished playing, this widget is gone and it's not on the screen anymore and therefore the element and
the render object is removed because that needs to be removed, you don't want to see it on the screen
anymore and hence dispose is called because when the element is cleared, the state object is cleared
as well and therefore removed. Now that is the lifecycle of widgets and most importantly, of state.
Now when would you use that? As I said, initState is often used for fetching some initial data you
need in your app or in a widget of your app. didUpdateWidget is probably used way less often, you could
use it if you know something changed in your parent widget and you need to refetch data in your state.
So if you're fetching data from a database and you received a new ID in your widget which is attached
to the state and for that ID, you want to fetch new data, you could do this here in didUpdateWidget
with the information that you have and the new ID and dispose is great for cleaning up data.
Let's say you have a listener to a real time Internet connection which sends you new messages because
you're building a chat application or anything like that, then you want to clean up this connection to your
server here when your widget is removed, so that you don't have that ongoing connection in memory even
though you have no widget anymore,
this will lead to strange bugs and also to memory leaks.
So cleaning up listeners or life connections, that is something you would often do in dispose and that's
it for the widget lifecycle. For now, we'll not use too many of these methods but later, we'll definitely
need initState
once we start interacting with web servers.